.TH defrag.exfat 8
.SH NAME
defrag.exfat \- Defragment or assess fragmentation on an exFAT filesystem

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B defrag.exfat
[\fB\-f\fR | \fB\-a\fR]
.I device
.P
.B defrag.exfat
\fB\-h\fR | \fB\-\-help\fR
.P
.B defrag.exfat
\fB\-v\fR | \fB\-\-version\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B defrag.exfat
is a utility to defragment files on an exFAT-formatted device or assess its current fragmentation status.

Defragmentation reorganizes scattered file clusters into contiguous blocks, which may improve I/O performance — especially on mechanical storage devices.

By default, when no option is specified, the tool will prompt the user with a warning recommending to run \fBfsck.exfat\fR first to ensure filesystem consistency.

This safety prompt can be bypassed using the \fB\-f\fR option.

The \fB\-a\fR option enables assessment mode, which analyzes fragmentation without modifying the filesystem.

The target device must be \fIunmounted\fR before running this command.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-force
Perform defragmentation without prompting the fsck warning. Use with caution.
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-assessment
Assess the fragmentation status of the exFAT volume without making any changes.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show usage information and exit.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Defragment an unmounted exFAT device (with safety warning):
.EX
$ defrag.exfat /dev/sda1
.EE

.PP
Defragment without prompting (force mode):
.EX
$ defrag.exfat -f /dev/sda1
.EE

.PP
Assess fragmentation status (read-only):
.EX
$ defrag.exfat -a /dev/sda1
.EE

.PP
Show version:
.EX
$ defrag.exfat -v
.EE

.PP
Show help:
.EX
$ defrag.exfat -h
.EE

.SH NOTES
It is \fBstrongly recommended\fR to run \fBfsck.exfat\fR on the device before defragmenting to ensure filesystem integrity.

Always backup critical data before defragmenting.
